hey everybody this is Bob with another
audio tutorial in this video we're going
to take a look at phase cancellation so
we'll start out by looking at a basic
waveform and then define what phase
cancellation is and then what you can do
about it so let's start by looking at a
waveform that I created now I'm in Logic
Pro it doesn't matter which doll you're
using this is audio principle so this is
going to apply to Cubase Pro Tools to
sonar whatever so what I have recorded
here in logic is a basic sine wave now I
took the test oscillator in logic and
just set it at 220 Hertz and just let it
run and then I recorded this on an audio
track so we can take a look at a basic
sine wave now this let me zoom in here
to this track that I have and you'll see
what a basic sine wave looks like so
there you have it so whenever we are
recording an acoustic instrument let's
just say a stringed instrument for
example you're playing an acoustic
guitar that string that's vibrating is
subdividing it itself into several
segments and so you have harmonics in
addition to the fundamental tone they're
partials of that vibrating string
whether it's a piano or guitar or
what-have-you
so this is what gives each instrument
including vocals its unique
characteristic is the partials that it's
creates so as you heard in this sine
wave it doesn't have any that we're just
looking at the fundamental tone but this
is a great way to demonstrate phase
cancellation as you'll see now one of
the things that we're looking at here
this the horizontal line that goes
across here is kind of the null or the
neutral point between the positive and
negative so look at this line above this
horizontal line as positive a positive
signal and then when it drops below this
horizontal point this is your negative
signal here so if you ever watched an
exposed speaker when it moves in and out
it pushes and pulls
you have the same kind of diaphragm in a
microphone that pushes impulse and so
that's what creates this this signal
that we're looking at here so what is
phase cancellation phase cancellation is
when you have two tracks that have
similar waveforms or identical waveforms
and they're shifted in time a little bit
to where they're out of phase with one
another so let me give you an example
I'm gonna take this track here I'm
holding down the option key and I'm just
gonna make a copy of it and drag it and
put it straight down so what we have
here now is we have two signals that are
actually complementing one another so
when this signal goes up positive in
Peaks this one does the exact same thing
so they're gonna support and enhance one
another so it's gonna give it a thicker
richer sound in this case since it's
just a sine wave it should increase the
volume so let's test that real quick so
I'm going to mute this track so now
we're just listening to this top track
here and let's look at our mix buss and
see what we have
so coming out of our mixbus we have
minus 19 okay so now I'm gonna turn this
other track on and they should support
one another since they're in phase and
it should be louder let's check it out
so you can see now with them combined it
increased the volume to minus 14 dB
how do they get out of phase so when we
have two microphones recording the same
source and I typically do this let's say
with an acoustic guitar I have one mic
on the 12th or 14th fret or seventh fret
somewhere around there and then I might
use another microphone on the bridge
into the guitar to get a different
tonality and then I may mix those two
tones together if I have a second
microphone placed in such a way that the
distance away from the source is gonna
record it at a later time it may shift
this waveform so for example let me
shift this over here to where it looks
like it's out of phase now so when this
waveform is going negative this one here
shifted in time is going positive so
let's see what happens to the tone
so notice that the volume now on my
mixbus has dropped for these combined
signals down to minus thirty eight so
it's a very weak tone so if this was an
acoustic guitar or snare drum it would
just sound very thin because it's out of
phase and we can you'd be able to hear
that right away especially when you do a
comparison well how do you do a
comparison real quick we need to put a
plug-in in that will invert the phase of
one of these it doesn't matter since
they're out of phase let's see what
happens now it's almost silent now as a
matter of fact it is silent there's
nothing coming out of my mix bus so you
can see I can get this sine wave out of
Phase two where it actually goes silent
I get nothing out of it so what most
people suggest that you do is grab a
plug-in and I'm going to enlarge it go
to the utility go to the game plug-in it
doesn't matter which track I put it on I
happen to be on this track here the top
one since they're 180 degrees out of
phase let me zoom back out here since
there are a hundred and eighty degrees
out of phase all I have to do is flip
the phase invert switch and they'll be
back so let me hit play
and now I'm gonna hit the switch so if
you were comparing an instrument that
was like this out of phase pretty much
180 degrees you could put a phase invert
plug in something that will flip the
phase 180 degrees and you could do a
comparison by just listening now when I
explain to you why that may not work in
all cases let's just look at this
waveform as it completes a complete
cycle like it's a 360 degree circle so
let's start at the top here and just
picture this going around in a circle
and coming all the way back up here to
360 degrees right so if we picture this
as a circle as I come down here and and
come to this null pointer this crossing
point between positive and negative this
would be 90 degrees of my circle so if I
picture this a circle that's 90 degrees
right and if I continue around the
bottom here would be 180 degrees and
then 270 and then back to 360 if I take
this waveform here when I look at where
it Peaks up here if I peak that bottom
one right here I'll use this cursor to
help help me line up that point right
there is what I'm looking at so if I
move this over here to right here so
instead of peaking here at 360 degrees
that next that bottom track Peaks right
here at 90 degrees if I flip the phase
now I'm not going to really hear any
difference so here's my gain plug in I
want to I want to flip this 180 degrees
what's it going to do it's gonna move it
from this 90 degree position it's gonna
move it 180 degrees which is going to be
over here it's still in the same
relative position to the zero position
it's 90 degrees out over here instead of
90 degrees out here let's take a listen
so you can see that my volume there on
my mixbus was -16 when I was playing
this and when I flipped the phase it
stayed at minus 16 that's because I
really didn't do I flipped the phase 180
degrees but if it's 90 degrees out all
I'm doing is moving it over to 270 so
that's why just simply grabbing a plug
in that you can flip the phase 180
degrees does not work in every case
because I've had many times that I
flipped the phase on something and I
don't hear a difference so it must be
okay right well that's not exactly true
if if I was a hundred percent in phase
actually let me put these back in phase
now so so let's see what we have and if
I flip the phase invert button now with
them in phase it should put it out of
phase right check it out so I'm not
perfectly in phase because I heard a
little bit of tone there but you get the
point so if I have something that's in
phase and I and I flipped the phase on
it it should sound worse okay so if I
get myself in a situation where I can't
hear the difference
maybe I'm closer to this ninety degree
point and all I'm doing is moving it
over 270 or vice versa so in this case a
phase invert plug-in that just flips it
180 degrees does not work by the way
where do you get yourself in a situation
like this more often than not is a snare
drum
where you have a top mic and a bottom
mic the microphones are pointed directly
at each other or close to it and when
you hit that top snare what happens to
that skin on that snare it pushes down
and the microphones on top of it and
what happens to the skin on the bottom
it's pushing down but the microphones
looking up so you're actually getting
the reverse thing happen in that
diaphragm of that microphone so while
one is being pushed in the other one's
being pulled out that's how you end up
in this situation where you
have a plug in and just flip the phase
and it's going to work because it's
going to get a closer but it still it's
not perfect what would be perfect would
be for you to zoom in on your waveform
you can't see anything when you look
like this right but when you zoom in on
that waveform you can very precisely
look at these and you can match them or
line them up another way you can do it
is figure out how many samples you are
from this this point let's say we had
something that was closer to 90 degrees
you could go into the sample editor and
you could do this you could say okay the
difference between this peak and this
peak is so many samples and then you
could offset with a delay plug-in the
sample delay logic has one if you've
ever used this but if we go to delay
you'll see sample delay so what you can
do is you can actually delay the signal
of the one that needs to be delayed by a
certain number of samples there's a
hundred and one samples for example so
that's getting down to a sample editor
so now it's very interesting way of
doing that and if you're in Pro Tools it
has a very easy way to change the ruler
to go up and see how many samples you're
looking at between two points so there's
all kinds of ways of doing this but my
point is using a plug-in to flip the
phase 180 degrees is not a perfect
solution it's better to find out how far
out you are when you use two microphones
and put them in phase that way you'll
have more bottom in you know with your
kick drum with your overheads with snare
drums and your acoustic guitar and
anything your record will sound better
if you get it in phase and do it a
little bit more precisely the other
thing is when you're recording you could
use this as a general rule it's more of
a guideline than a rule but when you're
using two microphones use the three in
one rule so for example I have a my
her phone on a on the 12th fret on
acoustic guitar and it's six inches away
from that source that I'm recording
let's say I want the next microphone to
be three times that distance so 18
inches away would be a good rule of
thumb or more use that three and one
rule and that'll get you started and
then you can always when you're using
two microphones go back and look at the
waveforms and make sure that you're in
phase okay one other thing I want to
share with you before I let you go is
that phase cancellation is very much
related to mono compatibility so let me
just show you one thing here I have
aligned this waveform up to be 100%
phase cancelled so if I hit play now
it's 100% phase cancelled so I go over I
have a gain plug-in on one of these I'm
gonna hit play and phase invert the tone
comes back okay now so we just tested
that it's a hundred percent out of phase
watch what happens when I move the pan
knobs now so when I pan them left and
right and get them out of the center
they're not face cancelled anymore right
so where this one's going negative and
this one here is going positive that's a
big deal if it's in model because the
sounds coming out of the same place and
the speaker but if I have this track
going into the left speaker and this one
going into the right speaker they don't
cancel each other now well the problem
with that is that you do your mixing
this way you start panning things but if
you put that same game plug-in on the
mix bus your stereo bus then you can
come over here and you can check for
mono compatibility just by summing it to
mono so let's check that out
notice as soon as I went to mono that
these two tracks now cancel each other
out so that's really important to check
your mixes for mono compatibility
because you may not have any problem
with the mixes way everything is panned
but soon as you some de mono you realize
you have a phase problem so another good
way to check so what you're listening
for when you sum de mono just make sure
you don't have things start disappearing
like your snare drum or your kick drum
or your guitars all of a sudden sound
weak so that's a good check for you
alright if you guys have some better
ways of doing this please comment and
subscribe and I'll see you in the next
video